interpersonal interaction: the dynamic process through which individuals communicate and engage with each other. It involves the exchange of information, feelings, meanings, behaviors and influence between two or more people. It encompasses direct in-person or online interactions as well as mental representations of interactions, recollected and imagined. Key aspects of interpersonal interaction include verbal and nonverbal communication, emotional exchange, roles and expectation, power and influence, feedback loops. It can significantly impact the nature and strength of relationships. Positive interpersonal interactions are essential for social and emotional well-being.

interpersonal interaction/agency: is defined by individuation and self-differentiation, encompassing needs and strivings for achievement, mastery, dominance, and control.

interpersonal interaction/communion: is defined by a focus on and connection with others, encompassing needs and strivings for belonging, intimacy and nurturance.

interpersonal interaction/adaptive functioning: is defined as a sustained ability to engage interpersonally in ways that coordinate and satisfy the agentic and communal needs of self and other, relatively consistent with one’s developmental stage and socio-cultural context, through the flexible, stable, and effective regulation of self, affect, and interpersonal behavior. 

interpersonal interaction/dysfunction: is defined as the sustained breakdown in any of the processes that support and maintain the flexible, stable, and effective regulation of self, affect, or interpersonal behavior. Examples include impairments, biases, or instability of perceptions of self and other, overvalued or extreme motivations or beliefs; interpersonal repertoire, skills deficits; idiosyncratic, deviant, inconsistent, or rigidly applied behavioral rules, such as overvalued or disavowed goals; amplified or exaggerated links among perceptions, affect, and behavior etc. It leads to self, affect, and behavioral dysregulation, and ultimately unstable, dissatisfying, and even destructive interpersonal relations.

interpersonal interaction process: it is dynamic and transactional. Affect serves as the primary reinforcer and punisher, signaling whether an individual’s motives and goals are being satisfied. Motivations to engage in interpersonal situations and for which behaviors are expressed are organized around agency and communion and are represented by strivings for self-esteem, an agentic motivation, and security, a communal motivation, and when satisfied lead to decreases in negative affect and vulnerability, and increases in positive affect. Individual differences in motivations, imbued through basic biological temperament and shaped through development and experience, influence the construal of situations, the types of situations entered and avoided, and the behaviors exhibited within situations in a probabilistic fashion based on available affordances. Different modalities of functioning weave together to form what is experienced as a seamless process e.g. motivation, perception, construal, physiology, affect, behavior. Individual differences in interpersonal functioning are shaped and can lead to longstanding change via accumulated outcomes of those interactions. In this way, the trait and process approaches interpenetrate and form a coherent whole across brief and extended timescales.

interpersonal interaction/complementarity: in a probabilistic fashion dominant behavior pulls for or invites submission from the other, and warmth invites warmth. Interactions that adhere to these patterns should lead to greater positive affect and stability of the transaction or relationship, and those that do not lead to renegotiation and possibly negative affect and dissolution.

contemporary integrative interpersonal theory: a psychological model based on interpersonal circumplex that explains interpersonal behavior as a dynamic interaction of agency and communion, linking personality traits and disorders with how people relate to others across different situations and relationships. It integrates insights from interpersonal theory, personality psychology, attachment theory, and clinical science to provide a unified understanding of interpersonal behavior, personality traits, and psychopathology.

interpersonal circumplex: a psychological model that maps interpersonal behavior, traits, and relationships onto a circular space defined by two main dimensions i.e. agency which is the vertical axis representing the degree of control, assertiveness, or influence a person expresses in interactions and ranging from high agency (dominant, controlling, assertive, competitive) to low agency (submissive, passive, deferential), and communion which is the horizontal axis representing the degree of warmth, friendliness, and cooperation a person show, and ranging from high communion (warm, kind, trusting, cooperative) to low communion (cold, distant, critical, hostile). It is a circular structure that places interpersonal behaviors around a circle, with combinations of agency and communion forming octants. Examples include dominant–warm (persuasive, supportive leadership); dominant–cold(aggressive, arrogant, controlling); submissive–cold(withdrawn, avoidant, resentful); submissive–warm(loyal, agreeable, self-sacrificing) etc. This circular layout helps visualising how different traits blend and how interpersonal styles relate to one another.



